Abduction--Reasoning that generates hypotheses to explain puzzling facts.

ACT -- “Adaptive Control of Thought”  A computational theory of thinking developed by John Anderson.

Affective computing-- Study of computing technology that relates to, arises from, or deliberately influences emotions.

Algorithm-- A step-by-step procedure for solving a problem.

Amygdala --Almond-shaped part of the brain involved in emotions such as fear.

Analogy --Mental process that makes connections between relations in two sets of objects.

Anthropology --The study of the origins, distribution, social relations, and culture of human beings.

Artificial intelligence --The study of how computers can be programmed to perceive, reason, and act.

Backprogagation --Learning algorithm in feedforward networks that adjusts the strengths of the links between neurons.

Bayesian network --A directed graph that that can be used to reason with probabilistic information.

Case-based reasoning --Reasoning by analogy.

Chaos --Property of a dynamic system that it is highly sensitive to small changes.

Cognitive grammar --Approach to linguistics that rejects the traditional separation of syntax and semantics.

Cognitive science --The interdisciplinary study of mind and intelligence.

Coma --State of deep unconsciousness caused by disease or injury.

Computation --Physical process with states that represent states of another system and with transitions between states that amount to operations on the representations.

Concept --Mental representation of a class of objects or events that belong together, usually corresponding to a word.

Conceptual change --Process in which concepts acquire new meaning.

Conceptual combination --Process in which new concepts are constructed by joining or juxtaposing old ones.

Connectionism --Approach to cognitive science that models thinking by artificial neural networks.

Consciousness-- Mental state involving attention, awareness, and qualitative experience.

Cortex --Outer layer of the brain, responsible for many higher cognitive functions.

CRUM --The Computational-Representational Understanding of Mind: the hypothesis that thinking is performed by computations operating on representations.

Culture --The way of life of a society, including beliefs and behaviors.

Data structure --An organization of information in a computer program.

Deduction --Reasoning from premises to a conclusion such that if the premises are true then the conclusion must also be true.

Distributed artificial intelligence --Problem solving that requires communication among more than one computer, each of which possesses some intelligence.

Distributed cognition --Problem solving that requires communication among more than one thinker.

Distributed representation --Neural networks that use patterns of activity in multiple nodes or neurons to stand for objects or situations.

Dopamine --Neurotransmitter involved in reward pathways in the brain.

Dualism --Philosophical view that the mind consists of two separate substances, soul and body.

Dynamic (dynamical) system --Collection of interacting objects whose changes are describable by mathematical equations.

Electroencephalogram (EEG) --Recording of electrical activity in the brain.

Embodiment --Property of having a body and experiencing the world by means of it.

Emotion --Positive or negative mental state that combines physiological input with cognitive appraisal.

Emotional intelligence --Ability to deal effectively with the emotions of oneself and others.

Empiricism --The philosophical view that knowledge comes primarily from sensory experience.

Explanation schema --Mental representation of a pattern of causal connections.

Feedforward network --Artificial neural network in which the flow of activity is in one direction, from input neurons to output neurons.

Frame --Data structure that represents a concept or schema.

Functionalism --Version of materialism according to which mental states are defined by their functional relations, not by any particular kind of physical realization.

Hebbian learning --Process in neural networks that strengthens the association between two neurons that are simultaneously active.

Hippocampus --Brain region involved in the acquisition of memories.

Image --Mental structure that is similar to what it represents.

Induction --Reasoning that introduces uncertainty.

Inheritance --Form of inference in which information is transferred from a higher to a lower structure.

Innate --A representation or process that is genetic rather than learned.

Insula (insular cortex) --Brain region that integrates information from many bodily senses.

Intentionality --Property of a representation or mental state that it is about some aspect of the world.

Lesion --Abnormal change in an organ such as the brain.

Linguistics --The study of language.

Link --Connection between two artificial neurons that enables one to influence the activity of the other.

Local representation --Artificial neural network in which each node stands for a single concept or proposition.

Logic --The study of valid reasoning.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI and fMRI) --Technique that uses magnets to produce images of the structure and function of organs.

Materialism --Philosophical view that minds are purely physical.

Meaning --The content of a representation that results from its relations to other representations and the world.

Mechanism --System of interconnected parts that produces regular changes.

Memory --Storage of information, either temporary (short-term or working memory) or permanent (long-term).

Mental model --Mental structure that approximately stands for something in the world.

Mental representation-- A structure or process in the mind that stands for something.

Metaphor --Use of language to understand and experience one kind of thing in terms of another.

Model --Structure that approximately represents some objects or events.

Multiagent system --Interacting collection of computers capable of intelligent action.

Neural network --Interconnected group of neurons.

Neuron --Nerve cell.

Neuroscience --Study of the structure and functioning of brains.

Neurotransmitter --Molecule that transmits nerve impulses across a synapse.

Parallel --Process in which more than computation is performed at the same time.

Parallel constraint satisfaction --Process in which a problem is solved by using a parallel algorithm to find the best assignment of values to interconnected aspects of the problem.

Parallel distributed processing --Approach to cognitive science that models thinking by artificial neural networks with distributed representations.

Philosophy --Study of the fundamental nature of knowledge, existence, and morality.

Positron emission tomography (PET) --Technique that uses radioactive isotopes to produces images of the chemical function of organs such as blood flow in the brain.

Prefrontal cortex --Area of the brain at the front of the front of the cortex, responsible for the highest cognitive functions such as reasoning.

Production Rule-- a representation of the form IF something THEN something.

Psychology --Study of the minds of humans and other animals.

Rationalism --The philosophical view that knowledge comes primarily by reasoning that is independent of sensory experience.

Recurrent network --Neural network in which the output of some neurons feeds back via intervening connections to become input to them.

Relaxation --Process in which an artificial neural network reaches a state of stable activations.

Representation --A structure or activity that stands for something.

Robot --Machine capable of performing complex physical acts similar to ones done by humans.

Rule-- A mental representation of the form IF something THEN something.

Schema --A mental representation of a class of objects, events, or practices.

Search --A computational process of looking for or carrying out a sequence of actions that lead to desired states.

Situated action --Action that results from being embedded in a physical or social world.

SOAR --“State, Operator, And Result” – A computational theory of thinking developed by Allen Newell and others.

Social cognition --Study of how people think about each other.

Social epistemology --Study of social practices that encourage or inhibit the development of knowledge.

Somatic marker --Brain signal corresponding to states of the body relevant to emotions.

Source analog --Set of objects, properties, and relations that suggests conclusions about a target analog.

Spike train --Firing pattern of a neuron, consisting of a sequence of firing episodes.

Spreading activation --Computational process in which the activity of one structure leads to the activity of an associated structure.

Syllogism --Kind of deduction in which the premises and conclusions have forms such as “All A are B” and “No A are B”.

Synapse --Space in which a signal passes from one neuron to another.

Target analog --Set of objects, properties, and relations that can be learned about by comparison to a source analog.

Theory --Set of hypotheses that explain observations.

Thought experiment --Use of the imagination to investigate nature.

Ventromedial prefrontal cortex --The bottom-middle part of the prefrontal cortex.

Whorf hypothesis-- Conjecture that language determines how we perceive and think about the world. 